welcome everyone to the first lecture of
our new course deep learning for natural
language processing time for quantum i'm
a lecturer here in the computer science
department although I spend most of my
time at a company called deepmind in
London four days a week there and this
course will be a collaboration between
the computer science department and deep
mind and so we we've got for you a range
of different speakers mostly from
deepmind a few other places and you get
to meet during the course of this
lecture so let's get started so that the
sort of first starting side is why
should you be here and take this course
and the key reason you should take this
course we're interested in language this
is going to be about language is gonna
be about the computational processing of
language and how it relates to
artificial intelligence artificial
intelligence is a pretty hot topic at
the moment in in computer science and
society in general and hopefully by the
end of this you'll agree with me that
language is really one of the most
compelling aspect of intelligence worthy
of a study so historically language
computational linguistics has been very
strongly associated with AI maybe some
would say too much so so through the
second half of the 20th century a lot of
work and I was language-based not not a
whole lot of progress was made people
moved away from language recently quite
a lot of progress has been made and now
people coming back to this problem of
how do we deal with intelligence and
language language is cool because it's
well it's how we communicate but it's
more than just communication so we
shouldn't just simplistically think of
language is a way of conveying ideas
between us but we can think of a way of
provoking concepts in people we speak to
so if i say the word dog that's just a
sound wave but now all of you I can vote
the concept of a doll
little for like a very creature in your
mind and you all have slightly different
concepts of dog but just by using the
the medium of language I can invoke that
concept in you so language more than
communication it's a it's an interesting
phenomena
it's when we still don't really
understand that well so that's why this
research on how to process language as
well seeing this course but also we
don't fully understand how humans learn
language how children come to be so
proficient language so quickly with so
little that stimulus
ok so hopefully that's a bit of
high-level motivation so some
nitty-gritty details about this course
there is a webpage anything is anything
much interesting on it yet maybe they
will be later on we'll see these
lectures are being recorded
depending on how difficult it proves to
be hopefully I've got to put them up so
that you can review them but it may take
more time then then i might have to do
that there's no textbook for this course
and partly because a lot of the things
we'll discuss a client new and most of
the things especially the second half
look for the course relates to research
really done in the last two or three
years but there are some good general
text is a very new textbook on deep
learning from me a good fellow and and
your men do it all for deep learning you
can get that in physical form or the
website has the PDF that you can
download so that's a very useful
resource it covers deep learning in
general does and this chapters that are
quite relevant particular recurrent
neural network chapter which could be
quite useful to you and then there's a
lot of textbooks in general machine
learning so particularly the the Murphy
textbook machine-learning out lift off
the earth also there but that's Murphy
and the bishop takes textbook you'll
find those in the library's i think i've
used in the past for machine learning
courses so they may be in your in your
college libraries obviously the lectures
runs on tuesday at 46 and the other on
Thursday also from 46 slightly different
to other courses in in cs5 allocated two
hours for the
just that doesn't mean elections going
to go for two hours but i just thought
I'd allocate plenty of time I find one
hour bit too short sometimes we're going
to have lots of invited speakers some of
the week so i might have we might put
sort of two hour long lectures
back-to-back in one of the slots on
other weeks that might be quite sure
i'll try that you know beforehand
roughly what's what's happening in this
first week we'll probably use most of
the two hours today and and on thursday
so there will be no lectures next week
so most of the people involved in the
course are away in Germany on a seminar
next week so there's gonna be no
lectures they will however be practical
next week so don't forget that so
they're gonna be seven practical
sessions I think they're on mondays and
fridays but you should check the
timetable you've got some excellent
demonstrators in brandon yiannis an
issue all graduate students here in the
department and experience deep learning
practitioners so they should be very
handy for you learning the practical
aspects of the course they should be
seven of those from six to eight and
finally the assistant will be a total
take-home exam of the form that
hopefully will MC students amongst you
are familiar with from last term
ok so practical details rough lecture
schedule so I I make no promises that i
will keep this all that these will be
the people giving lectures but roughly
what we're going to do is today after my
short introduction
I'll introduce wangling from a deep mind
who's going to give you an introduction
to or or hopefully a review of basic
machine learning and neural network
starting from first principles how to
count up to the backpropagation
algorithm and then on Thursday and
Griffin step we'll talk about lexical
semantics and i also have I think chris
is going to come up as well maybe talk a
little bit about what we hope to do in
the practical sessions and I said week
too
no lectures so that your next week week
3 i'm going to talk about recurrent
neural networks and language modeling
very issues involved in those
I'm how to make them go fast then after
that we're going to run through lots of
applications of these models like go
through them all here but i will have a
range of guest lectures from deepmind
hopefully i'm jeremy from video will
come up and tell you a bit about gpus
why GPUs are important for these sorts
of models and you the graphic graphics
processing unit if you haven't come
across it before they happen to be the
computational device of choice to run
these models on so hopefully we'll get a
letter from video on those and then that
you have a second after this course will
largely look at applications of these
models in translation and speech and
language understanding so I
prerequisites so this is not meant to be
an introduction to machine learning
course so hopefully you've all got some
knowledge of machine learning
otherwise you may find this a bit opaque
so at least you should understand of
taking courses in linear algebra
calculus probability so the courses that
undergraduate student here in their
first year computer science degree are
perfectly adequate and that is what's
coming those courses adequate maybe not
what you remember from them so if you
can't remember that review those ideas
we're not going to do anything
particularly challenging in those areas
but basic ideas from those areas will be
useful so machine learning other side is
not introduction machine learning course
it will be very useful if you've taken
the introduction of machine learning
course that was offered last term or
last year here in the department or
something equivalent at the very least
you should have an idea of how to what
it means to train and evaluate machine
learning model and how to split up your
training data and how to keep your test
data separate from your training data
and all these basic issues machine
learning so you can actually work out
with your model works or not you should
know what overfitting generalization and
regularization mean that's very
important
machine learning is all about
generalization that's the whole point
how to generalize from what we see in
the past to what's going to happen in
the future optimization so you
you should have knowledge of what
gradient descent is stochastic gradient
descent hopefully its various variants
like a great and such things hopefully
come across these if not some reviewing
will be in order and also basic
algorithm flight linear regression
classification and definitely a little
bit of neural networks and back
propagation when will go through those
today but hopefully that will be a
review for you rather than introduction
finally for the practicals so
impractical to be implementing these
models are you going to need to know how
to program we're not going to teach you
to program we're not going to tell you
what language or talking to use those
practical so it's up to you what you
want to do
I've listed some here that a popular so
torch tensorflow piano and and dinette
these are all good tool kits for
implementing your network models torches
lowers a programming language the others
python-based or C++ so you should choose
something you're comfortable with and
and make use of that and there you're
not going to be given a lot of help in
learning to program while learning those
tickets so you should be confident in
going out to pick up those things
ok so going back to that the court in
general this course is about from the
name you can guess deep learning for
natural language processing there's a
lot more than natural language
processing and computational linguistics
and deep learning so that this is not a
comprehensive course in comfort
computational linguistics you shouldn't
come out the end of this course thinking
that deep learning is the answer to all
problems in language or that we're going
to get to a i simply by building bigger
and bigger recurrent neural networks
this course is really about looking at
recent developments in deep learning and
language and some particular successes
with these models are very effective
there's lots of things or areas within
not effective so it's just a caveat to
start with two not not feel that this is
all there is to know about machine
learning language and also language in
in particular in terms of where we're at
with iron language we still very much
scratching the surface of a
the phenomenon is language we're a long
way from real conceptual reasoning about
language and so whether the techniques
that will discover in this clip that
discussing this course will get us there
is an open question but you should have
an open mind about these areas and and
not feel that while these techniques
have impressive results they're not the
only way of approaching things so we
have a brief review of some of the
things that we might look at this course
hopefully to stimulate some interest so
language understanding is a core problem
that we want we want to solve in in
language processing so we want models
that can hear or read texts and
understand what is being said one way of
testing understanding is to ask
questions so a classic problem in
language understanding is with your
reading comprehension so later on in the
course will discuss reading
comprehension models this particular
example is from a data set we created
the deep mind where we took news
articles this one from the CNN about
Jeremy Clarkson punching his executive
producer and then ask questions of them
and train models to try to answer these
questions if you look at this particular
question is asking who will not press
charges against Jeremy Clarkson if you
look at the article to answer this
question the model needs to be on a
stitch together a few bits of different
bits of information needs to understand
from the opening sentence that it was a
producer who will not press charges and
then later on in the article producers
actually named as poison time and so a
model needs to be able to put those
things together and understand that
there's a first event of of the assault
and in the second event of the naming of
the producer and be able to put these
bits of information together so it's a
cool and challenging task and it's one
that we're a long way from doing
perfectly but we have some models you
can do respective respectively on such
tasks will look at those and one of the
areas weird deep learning has had a lot
of success in language is an article
transduction
asks so any task we are trying to take a
structure usually a sequence and convert
it into it
another structure normally another
sequence so classic example to the
speech recognition in speech recognition
you get a sequence of audio signals and
you want to transduce that into the
actual text that was spoken machine
translation is also another classic
transduction task when you get a
sequence of symbols in one language in
this case French and you want to
transduce that into the equivalent
sequence in English if you put these
together you can do things like
speech-to-speech translation and if you
go to apps like google translate on the
web now you can speak to them they will
try and convert that audio signal
intertext i'll try and translate that
text into another language for you and
then speak that back to you
so up until a few years ago these all
these problems were done with certain
models in the last couple of years all
of these properties industrial systems
have moved to deep learning models
actually big recurrent neural networks a
speech recognition machine translation
are all done with big recurrent networks
now and text-to-speech as well is moving
in that direction so we'll cover these
in the course of a couple of weeks
another fun sort of tasks that will look
at later on to become popular is image
understanding so one of the great things
about deep learning an approach to
processing language is a is it the same
approach that we use for processing
images now so doing has had a lot of
success in image recognition object
recognition and classification and
because we're now using the same models
for processing images as we're using the
language it becomes very easy to put
them together so now it's
straightforward to take a model that
recognizers objects and images and stick
that together with a language model that
generates language train these together
and we can train models to caption
images if we have examples of images and
their captions and we can also train
models to answer questions about images
so this is a data set that was produced
for task visual question answering
we have lots of images and questions
about those images what's happening so
from straightforward questions in a
class by my get right like what is the
man holding two more influential
problems like does this man have
twenty-twenty vision obviously their
model needs to understand something
about vision being related to the
glasses wearing that being an indication
that he probably doesn't have
twenty-twenty vision so I'm this one of
the the real contributions of the move
to deep learning language processing has
been the ability to the bolt together
systems from vision and other modalities
very simply and get these sort of models
so we're not going to deal too much with
linguistic structure
they're the sorts of things that that
deep learning does well in language at
the moment is still very much at the
behaviorism end of the spectrum that is
mapping input to output so we're a long
way from any sort of conceptual
reasoning about things and in this
course will mostly stay low level and
and look at sort of how do we transduce
an audio signal into the the text that
goes along with that or a French
sentence into english sentence but you
should never forget there's a lot more
language than just these shallow aspects
so here are some classic examples of us
at a random selection of language
phenomena that we should not forget when
when trying to process language so the
first one there is a classic since
ambiguity so I saw a duck is it a is a
ducking is in the physical motion or
that the the bird got idioms so one of
the wonderful things about language is
its compositionality so language follows
what looks like sort of logical rules
about how we can compose the words to
make get the meaning of a sentence so he
kicked the goal the composition is
basically the same as he takes the ball
we're just changing that the noun
phrases there but it doesn't always work
so in the classic medium of he kicked
the bucket of course that doesn't mean
anything about kicking or buckets that
means he died so languages compositional
except when it's not and this is one of
the most challenging things for any
computational models it's easy to write
logical systems and processes simple
examples but as soon as you let that
loose in the wild someone will say
something that doesn't fit your logical
rules and you'll have to deal with this
sort of thing so at the end of the
course will touch a bit on these issues
and how we start to think about the the
sort of hierarchical structure we see in
language the final example there is
something called a winograd schema which
of these reference problems where if you
read that sentence with the two
alternate endings so the board not fit
in the box because it was too big four
because it was too small if you switch
big and small it switches what they it
refers to so it was too big then the
ball hits the ball which was too big it
was too small that's the box which was
too small so getting your competition
computational mole to be able to tell
the difference between those two is very
difficult but it has to have a notion of
the physical world of boxes and balls
and size and how they could fit within
each other so that's one of the really
hard challenges in language processing
that we're a long way from solving but
we'll talk a bit about these sort of
reference problems later on in the
course
ok so that's why I sort of introduction
and and motivational opening so the rest
of this lecture I'm going to hand over
to wangling is going to give you a
thorough review of how to count and add
numbers and maybe a bit about neural
networks as well with the aid of some
sesame street characters